Unit 4 - CLIP and relatives - Modesl - BLIP mdx init (#178)
johko/computer-vision-course: chapters/en/Unit 4 - Mulitmodal Models/CLIP and relatives/blip.mdx

Reviewer: can we simply the paragraph?

# Multimodal Text Generation (BLIP)
## Introduction

After the release of CLIP, the AI community recognized the immense potential of larger datasets and contrastive learning in deep learning. One significant development in this area is [BLIP (Bootstrapping Language-Image Pre-training)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12086), which extends the capabilities of multimodal models to include text generation.

## CapFilt: Caption and Filtering

> BLIP introduces a novel approach to handling the noise often present in large, web-scraped datasets necessary for multimodal training. It employs an innovative captioning and filtering mechanism using deep learning models, which are further fine-tuned for this purpose. The processed data is then merged with human-annotated datasets to form a comprehensive and cleaner training set. Further details on this process can be found in the [BLIP paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12086).

Author: As multimodal models require large datasets, they often have to be scraped from the internet using image and alternative-text (alt-text) pairs. However, the alt-texts often do not accurately describe the visual content of the images, making them a noisy signal that is suboptimal for learning vision-language alignment. Hence, the BLIP paper introduced a caption and filtering mechanism (CapFit). This is made up of a deep learning model which filters out noisy pairs and another model which creates captions for images. Both of these models are first fine-tuned using a human annotated dataset. They found that cleaning the dataset using CapFit produced superior performance to just using the web dataset. Further details on this process can be found in the [BLIP paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12086). 

Does that sound better?

> BLIP introduces a novel approach to handling the noise often present in large, web-scraped datasets necessary for multimodal training. It employs an innovative captioning and filtering mechanism using deep learning models, which are further fine-tuned for this purpose. The processed data is then merged with human-annotated datasets to form a comprehensive and cleaner training set. Further details on this process can be found in the [BLIP paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12086).

Reviewer 2: Yes it does! We often write in shorter paragraphs for it's less ambiguous to read :)

## BLIP Architecture and Training
BLIP's architecture comprises four distinct models, sharing some parameters. The first model is an image encoder transformer that generates embeddings. Following this, there are three text encoders: the first is a standalone text encoder for embeddings, trained alongside the image encoder using contrastive loss. The second text encoder incorporates a cross-attention block to interact with the image encoder's output, trained via an image-text matching loss—a binary classification task. The final text encoder begins with causal self-attention, followed by cross-attention to the image encoder, and is trained using standard cross-entropy loss for autoregressive language models. The diagram below illustrates BLIP's architecture, highlighting parameter sharing with color-coded blocks.
![BLIP Architecture](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/BLIP.png)

> Post-training, the model can perform various tasks, selecting the appropriate text encoder based on the specific application.

Reviewer 2: Can you re-write this for clarity?

Author: The BLIP architecture combines a vision encoder and a Multimodal Mixture of Encoder-Decoder (MED), enabling versatile processing of both visual and textual data. Its structure is shown in the figure below which features (blocks with the same color share parameters):

- **Vision Transformer (ViT):** This is a plain vision transformer featuring self-attention, feed-forward blocks, and a [CLS] token for embedding representation.
- **Unimodal Text Encoder:** Resembling BERT's architecture, it uses a [CLS] token for embedding and employs contrastive loss like CLIP, for aligning image and text representations.
- **Image-Grounded Text Encoder:** This substitutes the [CLS] token with an [Encode] token. Cross-attention layers enable the integration of image and text embeddings, creating a multimodal representation. It employs a linear layer to assess the congruence of image-text pairs.
- **Image-Grounded Text Decoder:** Replacing the bidirectional self-attention with causal self-attention, this decoder is trained via cross-entropy loss in an autoregressive manner for tasks like caption generation or answering visual questions.

BLIP's architecture integrates a vision encoder with a multimodal mixture of encoder-decoder components, enabling advanced text and image processing. This design allows it to adeptly handle diverse tasks, from aligning image-text pairs to generating captions and answering visual questions.

Author: I thought that due to the many components, bullet points made more sense than a paragraph. Hope it provides more clarity on the architecture.

Reviewer 2: This is much better :)

## Example Use Case: BLIP-2

> Following BLIP's success, Salesforce, its creators, introduced BLIP-2, an enhanced iteration. BLIP-2's advancements and capabilities are detailed in the [BLIP-2 paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12597) and the [Hugging Face documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/blip-2). Here, we utilize BLIP-2 for visual questioning answering.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following BLIP's success, it's creator Salesforce introduced BLIP-2, an enhanced iteration. BLIP-2's advancements and capabilities are detailed in the [BLIP-2 paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12597) and the [Hugging Face documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/blip-2). Here, we utilize BLIP-2 for visual questioning answering.
```

```python
from PIL import Image
import requests
from transformers import Blip2Processor, Blip2ForConditionalGeneration
import torch

device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"

processor = Blip2Processor.from_pretrained("Salesforce/blip2-opt-2.7b")
model = Blip2ForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained("Salesforce/blip2-opt-2.7b", torch_dtype=torch.float16)
model.to(device)
url = "http://images.cocodataset.org/val2017/000000039769.jpg"
image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

prompt = "Question: How many remotes are there? Answer:"
inputs = processor(images=image, text=prompt, return_tensors="pt").to(device, torch.float16)
outputs = model.generate(**inputs)
text = processor.tokenizer.batch_decode(outputs, skip_special_tokens=True)
print(text)
```
This code snippet illustrates the application of BLIP-2 for visual question answering. Experiment with more complex queries or explore this functionality further using the provided Gradio app:

<iframe
	src="https://hysts-BLIP2-with-transformers.hf.space"
	frameborder="0"
	width="850"
	height="450">
</iframe>

> 

Reviewer 2: Would you like to add a super minimal implementation of BLIP/-2 architecture here or maybe fine-tuning snippet?

Author: I probably don't have the time atm to write the architecture correctly, but if there's a 2nd iteration I can do that. I found a neat fine tuning colab notebook for BLIP captioning, so I can link that and also write one for VQA?

Reviewer 2: Great! No need then. If you feel like it you can put a simple inference function though

Author: Sorry I'm not sure what you mean by simple inference function, because above the Gradio demo is code to use BLIP-2 for inference. So I'm not sure if you missed that or you mean something else.

```python
from PIL import Image
import requests
from transformers import Blip2Processor, Blip2ForConditionalGeneration
import torch

device = "cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu"

processor = Blip2Processor.from_pretrained("Salesforce/blip2-opt-2.7b")
model = Blip2ForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained("Salesforce/blip2-opt-2.7b", torch_dtype=torch.float16)
model.to(device)
url = "http://images.cocodataset.org/val2017/000000039769.jpg"
image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

prompt = "Question: How many remotes are there? Answer:"
inputs = processor(images=image, text=prompt, return_tensors="pt").to(device, torch.float16)
outputs = model.generate(**inputs)
text = processor.tokenizer.batch_decode(outputs, skip_special_tokens=True)
print(text)
```
This code snippet illustrates the application of BLIP-2 for visual question answering. Experiment with more complex queries or explore this functionality further using the provided Gradio app:

<iframe
	src="https://hysts-BLIP2-with-transformers.hf.space"
	frameborder="0"
	width="850"
	height="450">
</iframe>

## Conclusion

> BLIP marks a significant milestone in multimodal text generation, leveraging CLIP's strengths to create a robust model. It underscores the importance of dataset quality over quantity, contributing to the advancement of multimodal learning. For more details, refer to the [BLIP paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12086), [BLIP-2 paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.12597), and the Hugging Face documentation for [BLIP](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/blip) and [BLIP-2](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/blip-2).

Reviewer 3: Maybe it would be nice to also just mention the existence InstructBLIP, XInstructBLIP and BLIP-DIffusion, as they are tightly related and can all be found in Salesforce's LAVIS library: https://github.com/salesforce/LAVIS?tab=readme-ov-file
